თავი 1
1.	სტრატეგიის ფორმულირება:
Developing a vision and mission
2.	სტრატეგიის იმპლემენტაცია:
Establish annual objectives
3.	სტრატეგიის შეფასება
Reviewing external and internal factors that are the bases for current strategies,
Military Strategy “Greater is an army of sheep led by a lion, than an army of lions led be a sheep.”
Military strategy is the practice of reducing an adversary's physical capacity and willingness to fight, and continuing to do so until one's aim is achieved. 

თავი 2
მერკანტილიზმი 16 სახელმწიფოს მხრიდან ვაჭრების სასარგებლოდ სამეურნეო საქმიანობაში აქტიურ ჩარევა
absolute advantage 18 is the ability of a party to produce a good or service more efficiently than its competitors
comparative advantage 19  over others in producing a particular good if they can produce that good at a lower relative opportunity cost or autarky price, i.e. at a lower relative marginal cost prior to trade.
The Product Life Cycle Theory 20 early in a product's life-cycle all the parts and labor associated with that product come from the area where it was invented. After the product becomes adopted and used in the world markets, production gradually moves away from the point of origin.
New trade theory (NTT) 21 is a collection of economic models in international trade theory which focuses on the role of increasing returns to scale and network effects



თავი 3

Social responsibility
refers to actions an organization takes beyond what is legally required to protect or enhance
the well- being of living things

Sustainability refers to the extent that an organization’s operations and actions protect, mend, and preserve rather than harm or destroy the natural environment.
An ethical dilemma is a paradox that comes up when there are two or more options, but neither of them are the best ethical or moral option.



თავი 4
•	წინსვლის ინტეგრაცია - საკუთრების მოპოვებას ან კონტროლის გაზრდას დისტრიბუტორებზე ან საცალო მოვაჭრეებზე. Amazon
•	უკან ინტეგრაცი- კონტროლის მოპოვება მომწოდებლებზე. starbucks
•	ჰორიზონტალური ინტეგრაცია- Gaining control over competitionMergers, acquisitions, andtakeoversamong competitors

ინტენსიური სტრატეგია
•	ბაზარზე შეღწევა
ცდილობს გაზარდოს საბაზრო წილი არსებული პროდუქტებისა და სერვისებისთვის არსებულ ბაზრებზე მეტი მარკეტინგული ძალისხმევის მეშვეობით.
მაიკლ პორტერის ხუთი ზოგადი სტრატეგია
1. ტიპი 1: დაბალი ღირებულება - სტრატეგია
2. ტიპი 2: საუკეთესო ღირებულება-სტრატეგია
3. ტიპი 3: დიფერენციაცია
4. ტიპი 4: ფოკუსირება - დაბალი ღირებულება
5. ტიპი 5: ფოკუსი – საუკეთესო მნიშვნელობა

First mover
Fast follower
Late follower

Business-process outsourcing (BPO) involves companies hiring other companies to take over various parts of their the functional operations
Reshoring is the new term that refers to U.S. companies planning to move some of their manufacturing back to the USA.


თავი 6 -  internal audit

A firm’s strengths that cannot be easily matched or imitated by competitors are called distinctive competencies.
Key internal factors, consisting of both strengths and weaknesses - List of 20 most important strength, List of 20 most important weakness

თავი 7 - external audit
take advantage of external opportunities or that minimize the impact
of potential threats.
(1) economic forces; 
(2) social, cultural, demographic, and natural environment forces; 
(3) political, governmental, and legal forces;
(4) technological forces; 
(5) competitive forces.


external factor evaluation (EFE) matrix An external factor evaluation (EFE) matrix allows strategists to summarize and evaluate economic, social, cultural, demographic, environmental, political, governmental, legal, technological, and competitive information
The Competitive Profile Matrix The Competitive Profile Matrix (CPM) identifies a firm’s major competitors and its particular strengths and weaknesses in relation to a sample firm’s strategic position.



თავი 8
Swot
Space 
სფეის მატრიცა გულისხმობს სტრატეგიულ პოზიციონირებას და მოქმედებას. (financial position [FP] and competitive position [CP]) and two external dimensions (stability position [SP] and industry position [IP])
BCG- ბოსტოის მატრიცა
"ვარსკვლავები"- პროდუქტები, რომლებიც წამყვან პოზიციას იკავებენ სწრაფად განვითარებად ინდუსტრიაში. ისინი წარმოქმნიან მნიშვნელოვან მოგებას, მაგრამ ამავე დროს საჭიროებენ მნიშვნელოვან რესურსებს მუდმივი ზრდის დასაფინანსებლად,
"რძის ძროხა"- პროდუქტები, რომლებიც წამყვან პოზიციას იკავებენ შედარებით სტაბილურ ან კლებულ ინდუსტრიაში. ვინაიდან გაყიდვები შედარებით სტაბილურია დამატებითი ხარჯების გარეშე, ეს პროდუქტი უფრო მეტ მოგებას გამოიმუშავებს, ვიდრე საჭიროა ბაზრის წილის შესანარჩუნებლად.
"კითხვის ნიშნები"- პროდუქტები, რომლებსაც აქვთ მცირე გავლენა ბაზარზე (ბაზრის დაბალი წილი) განვითარებად ინდუსტრიაში. როგორც წესი, მათ ახასიათებთ მომხმარებელთა სუსტი მხარდაჭერა და გაურკვეველი კონკურენტული უპირატესობები. 
"ძაღლები"- პროდუქტები შეზღუდული გაყიდვებით დამკვიდრებულ ან კლებულ ინდუსტრიაში. ბაზარზე დიდი ხნის განმავლობაში ამ პროდუქტებმა ვერ მოიპოვეს მომხმარებელთა სიმპათია და ისინი მნიშვნელოვნად ჩამორჩებიან კონკურენტებს ყველა ასპექტში 
halo effect - when one trait of person is used to make an overall judjement
